---
title: "Program"
subtitle: "Computer Systems : A Programmer's Perspective"
header_type: splash
header_img: "https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1542831371-29b0f74f9713?q=80&w=2070&auto=format&fit=crop&ixlib=rb-4.0.3&ixid=M3wxMjA3fDB8MHxwaG90by1wYWdlfHx8fGVufDB8fHx8fA%3D%3D"
categories: [book-notes, computer-systems]
tags: [programs, high-level language, low-level language, programming]
---

```c
#include <stdio.h>
int main()
{
	printf("Hello, world");
	return 0;
}
```

This code returns `Hello, world` as its output. And with that, welcome to computer systems!

## Programs

A **program** is a set of instructions asking the computer to perform an action. It is written in a particular programming language by a programmer using a text editor like VSCode, Atom, etc.

For example, the following code opens your calculator [although it may be depreciated, it still works!]

```java
import java.io.*;
public class fff
{
    public static void main(String[] args)
    {
        try
        {
            Runtime.getRuntime().exec("calc");
        }
        catch (Exception e) {}
    }
}
```

The actual file that contains the code of a program is called a source file. It is a sequence of bytes that represents characters from the **ASCII [American Standard Code for Information Interchange] standard**.

> Nowadays, UNICODE [Universal Character Encoding] has replaced ASCII.

ASCII and UNICODE are 2 varieties of character encoding - a system that maps characters to binary digits so that the computer can process that easily.

> Cheatsheet for character encoding in [this website](https://www.utf8-chartable.de/)

### High and low levels

The languages used to write these programs go into 2 camps - high-level languages and low-level languages.

High-level language is one that is so simple that even a beginner can understand it.

Whereas, a low-level language is...complicated.

Let's compare a high-level language [such as Java] and a low-level language [such as Assembly] that print `Hello, world` in the console output :

```java
public class fff
{
    public static void main(String[] args)
    {
        System.out.println("Hello, world");
    }
}
```

```asm
section .data
	hello:     db 'Hello, World',10
	helloLen:  equ $-hello

section .text
	global _start

_start:
	mov eax,4
	mov ebx,1
	mov ecx,hello
	mov edx,helloLen
	int 80h
	mov eax,1
	mov ebx,0
	int 80h;
```

Ouch! I wasn't kidding when I said Assembly is hard. Since it's closer to the computer's hardware and binary, it isn't as human-friendly as high-level languages.

This also happens because high-level languages are **abstracted** from the complexities of the computer system.

#### Abstraction?

Abstraction is one of the 4 pillars of Object-Oriented Programming. But I'll simplify here.

It just means that the difficult-looking parts of a system are hidden away from the end-user [which is you!]. Only the features that are needed [at that moment] are shown.

For more details, check out [coming soon!].
