---
title: "High Performance Web Sites"
subtitle: "Essential Knowledge for Frontend Engineers"
header_type: splash
header_img: "https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1542831371-29b0f74f9713?q=80&w=2070&auto=format&fit=crop&ixlib=rb-4.0.3&ixid=M3wxMjA3fDB8MHxwaG90by1wYWdlfHx8fGVufDB8fHx8fA%3D%3D"
categories: [book-notes, hpws]
tags: [programs, high-level language, low-level language, programming]
---

> Only 10–20% of the end user response time is spent downloading the HTML docu- ment. The other 80–90% is spent downloading all the components in the page.

## Prologue

**What kind of a protocol is HyperText Transfer Protocol [HTTP]?**
A client/server protocol.

**What is HTTP made up of?**
Requests and response.

**How do browsers and servers communicate with each other?**
Using HTTP over the Internet.

**How does a HTTP request and response work?**
The browser sends an HTTP request for an URL. The server that hosts that URL returns a HTTP response.

**What are the types of requests in HTTP?**

- GET : Retrieve data from a server.
- POST : Create or update a resource in a server using the sent information.
- DELETE : Remove a resource from the server.
- OPTIONS : Return the communication option for a particular resource.
- HEAD : Retrieve only the headers of the resource from a server.
- TRACE : Establish a tunnel to the server.
- PUT : Update a resource or create it if it doesn't exist.

**What should a HTTP response contain?**
A status code, headers and body

**What is the syntax of a GET request?**
An URL followed by headers.

**What is underneath HTTP?**
Transmission Control Protocol [TCP].

## Rule 1 : Make fewer HTTP requests

**What is a simple way to improve response time?**
Reducing the no. of components in a page, which would reduce the no. of HTTP requests.

**How can one include images in a page without additional HTTP requests?**
By using the `data:` URL scheme.

**What is a pro and a con of using `background` style in an external stylesheet and adding your image there?**
Pro : It is cached with the stylesheet.
Con : It leads to an extra HTTP request.

**Why would performance decrease when you modularize your web page code?**
When we break our code into many small files, each file results in an additional HTTP request.

**What is a solution to keeping files modular and not decrease performance?**
To keep the files modular, but generate a combined target file from these modules for final usage.

## Rule 2 : Use a Content Delivery Network

**What is a Content Delivery Network [CDN]?**
A collection of web servers distributed across multiple location to deliver content more efficiently.

**What are some benefits of using a CDN?**

- Improved response times.
- Backups, caching and more storage.
- Can absorb spikes in traffic.

**What are some drawbacks of using a CDN?**

- Response time can be affected by other sites' traffic.
- No direct control of server.
- If CDN provider's performance degrades, so does yours.
